VPC NAT UI screenshots and Guest cluster using Overlay Networks (#1085)
harvester/docs: docs/rancher/guest-cluster-kubeovn-network.md

While guest clusters can use traditional virtual machine networking, they can also leverage Kube-OVN overlay or underlay networking to provide a flexible and Kubernetes-native networking model for workloads.

## Guest Cluster Deployment on Underlay Network

Deploying guest clusters on pure underlay networks is functionally similar to using traditional virtual machine VLAN networks, but with the added advantages of Kube-OVN features such as network policies and tenant-isolated VPCs.

For information about setting up the overlay infrastructure, see [Create an underlay network](../networking/kubeovn-pureunderlay.md#underlay-configuration).

## Guest Cluster Deployment on Overlay Network

Deploying guest clusters on overlay networks requires configuring a VPC NAT gateway to provide inbound and outbound connectivity to the virtual machines through DNAT and SNAT.

The key architectural features are as follows:

- Harvester provides the virtual machine infrastructure for the guest cluster's control plane and worker nodes.
- Rancher provisions and manages the lifecycle of the guest cluster.

> - Kube-OVN provides networking within the guest cluster using overlay tunnels between the guest nodes.

Reviewer: This statement seems inaccurate. Kube-OVN, as part of the underlying Harvester cluster, provides network connectivity for the VMs acting as guest nodes. It does not directly establish tunnels between the guest nodes themselves.

Author: I have rephrased this for better understanding for the users.

## Guest Cluster Provisioning

### Importing Harvester Clusters into Rancher

Harvester clusters are imported through Rancher's **Virtualization Management** interface.

The following occur after a Harvester cluster is imported:

- Rancher recognizes the cluster as a Harvester provider.
- Virtual machine resources become available through Rancher.
- Harvester can be selected as an infrastructure provider when creating downstream clusters.

For detailed instructions, see [Importing Harvester Cluster](./virtualization-management.md#importing-harvester-cluster).

### Provisioning a Guest Cluster

Rancher uses the Harvester Node Driver to automatically provision the required virtual machines and bootstrap Kubernetes on them.

For detailed instructions, see [Harvester Node Driver](./node/rke2-cluster.md).

:::info important

In the **Networks** section of the cluster creation screen, you must specify the correct underlay or overlay network.

:::

![](/img/v1.9/rancher/gc-overlayvmnetwork.png)

![](/img/v1.9/rancher/gc-overlayvm.png)

:::info important

> For VMs provisioned as downstream cluster nodes, ensure external connectivity is available by enabling DHCP and configuring dns_server=8.8.8.8 and natOutgoing=true on the subnet. This allows the VMs to obtain a default route and perform DNS resolution.

Reviewer: Ditto

> Since VMs attached to Kube-OVN overlay networks use private IP addresses, a route to the VM subnet must be configured on the rancher VM via the external IP used for SNAT/DNAT. This enables SSH access to the VM nodes from the Rancher UI.

Reviewer: This line is a bit confusing. Do we need a route to the VM subnet installed on the Rancher VM, or have DNAT/SNAT configured for the VM subnet? Or both?

Author: A route is required for the private subnet with EIP (configured in the vpc nat gw) as nexthop.
I have rephrased the wording for better understanding in the latest commit.

> Since the guest cluster VM nodes over Kube-OVN overlay networks use private IP addresses, a route to the guest cluster VM node subnet must be configured on the Rancher VM with the Kube-OVN EIP (configured during the VPC NAT gateway EIP setup) as the next hop. This provides network reachability from the Rancher VM to the guest cluster VM nodes and enables SSH access through the Rancher UI.

Reviewer: I still have concerns about this paragraph. Are we sure that reverse connectivity from the external Rancher instance to the guest cluster running on an overlay network is required?

IIRC, Rancher Manager can manage clusters behind NAT. The cluster agent running in the guest cluster connects back to Rancher Manager and establishes long-lived connections that Rancher Manager then uses to communicate with the cluster.

Author: I do not think we have any existing cases (before overlay networks) where the rancher instance has to ssh to a node IP which is private. The guest cluster VM Nodes created from a VM Vlan network will not have problem as they share the same subnet with the rancher VM.

In case of overlay networks, the node IP of the downstream VM Node will be for example 172.20.10.0/24 and to ssh to this node, rancher VM must have connectivity or know how to reach 172.20.10.0/24 which is not by default installed inside rancher VM. So by installing a route for private IP CIDR (node IP) via EIP, rancher VM  sends the traffic for private IP to the GW (EIP of the NAT GW) and the GW will forward the traffic to corresponding VM acting as downstream node in 172.20.10.0/24 network.

This is not only for rancher instance but any external traffic communicates with the EIP (as only this is visible to the external networks) and VPC NAT GW relays the traffic to corresponding private IP based on configured DNAT rules.

Reviewer: By “SSH to this node,” do you mean that the external Rancher server must be able to access the node via SSH to provision or manage the downstream cluster?

According to [Rancher’s documentation](https://ranchermanager.docs.rancher.com/v2.15/reference-guides/rancher-manager-architecture/communicating-with-downstream-user-clusters), its architecture is deliberately designed to avoid this requirement. The cluster agents running in the downstream cluster establish reverse tunnels to the external Rancher server, allowing Rancher to manage the cluster even when it is behind NAT.

Author: As we discussed, updated it to make it more clearer for users that the ssh connectivity is required for debugging purposes.

- Consistent networking model across environments

For information about setting up the overlay infrastructure, see [Create a VPC NAT Gateway](../networking/kubeovn-vpcnatgateway.md#kubeovn-as-secondary-cni).

## Guest Cluster Provisioning

### Importing Harvester Clusters into Rancher

Harvester clusters are imported through Rancher's **Virtualization Management** interface.

The following occur after a Harvester cluster is imported:

- Rancher recognizes the cluster as a Harvester provider.
- Virtual machine resources become available through Rancher.
- Harvester can be selected as an infrastructure provider when creating downstream clusters.

For detailed instructions, see [Importing Harvester Cluster](./virtualization-management.md#importing-harvester-cluster).

### Provisioning a Guest Cluster

Rancher uses the Harvester Node Driver to automatically provision the required virtual machines and bootstrap Kubernetes on them.

For detailed instructions, see [Harvester Node Driver](./node/rke2-cluster.md).

:::info important

In the **Networks** section of the cluster creation screen, you must specify the correct underlay or overlay network.

> Also, For VMs provisioned as downstream cluster nodes, ensure external connectivity is available by enabling DHCP and dns_server is set to a valid DNS server IP address (for example, `8.8.8.8`) and natOutgoing=true on the subnet. This allows the VMs to obtain a default route and perform DNS resolution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For virtual machines provisioned as downstream cluster nodes, ensure external connectivity by enabling DHCP, specifying a valid `dns_server` IP address (for example, `8.8.8.8`), and setting `natOutgoing=true` on the subnet. This configuration ensures that nodes obtain a default route, perform DNS resolution, and access external networks.
```

:::

![](/img/v1.9/rancher/gc-overlayvmnetwork.png)

![](/img/v1.9/rancher/gc-overlayvm.png)

:::tip

> Since the guest cluster VM nodes over Kube-OVN overlay networks use private IP addresses, a route to the guest cluster VM node subnet must be configured on the Rancher VM with the Kube-OVN EIP (configured during the VPC NAT gateway EIP setup) as the next hop. This provides network reachability from the Rancher VM to the guest cluster VM nodes and enables SSH access through the Rancher UI for debugging purposes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because guest cluster nodes on Kube-OVN overlay networks use private IP addresses, you must configure a route to the virtual machine node subnet on the Rancher virtual machine, specifying the Kube-OVN EIP (configured during VPC NAT gateway EIP setup) as the next hop. This ensures network reachability between the Rancher virtual machine and guest cluster nodes, enabling SSH access through the Rancher UI for debugging.
```
